docs(templates/extras/simp.md): edited, added table of simp options (#196)
leanprover-community/leanprover-community.github.io: templates/extras/simp.md

## Overview

In this document we will explain basic usage of Lean's simplifier
tactic [`simp`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib_docs/tactics.html#simp),
and the related tactic [`dsimp`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib_docs/tactics.html#dsimp).

## Introduction

Lean has a "simplifier", called `simp`, that consults a database of
facts called *`simp` lemmas* to (hopefully) simplify hypotheses and
goals. The simplifier is what is known as a *conditional term
rewriting system*: all it does is repeatedly replace (or *rewrite*)
subterms of the form `A` by `B`, for all applicable facts of the form
`A = B` or `A ↔ B`.

The simplifier mindlessly rewrites until it can rewrite no more.  The
`simp` lemmas are all oriented, with left-hand sides always being

> rewritten by right-hand sides, and never vice versa. The database of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
replaced by right-hand sides, and never vice versa. The database of
```

> rewritten by right-hand sides, and never vice versa. The database of
> facts is curated such that things are put into some approximation of a normal
> form, and (at least ideally) the facts are *confluent*, meaning the
> order in which the simplifier considers rewrites does not matter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rewritten by right-hand sides, and never vice versa. 

Ideally, the database of facts would result in expressions being rewritten
into a normal form. 
In practice, this is often unachievable (normal forms may not exist, or there
may not exist a collection of rewrite rules that produce them),
but nevertheless we aim to approximate this ideal where possible.

Even better, we would like the database of facts to be *confluent*,
meaning the order in which the simplifier considers rewrites does not matter.
Again, while this is not always achievable, we aim to be close to confluent
where possible.
```

end
```

How would a human solve that goal? They would notice that `a * a⁻¹ = 1`,
that `1 * 1 = 1`, and so on, until they had simplified the example
to `b = b`, which is obviously true.

> This is also what the simplifier is doing. Indeed, if you add

Reviewer: Could I suggest you edit this paragraph so it introduces `simp?` first, and then mentions that `set_option` possibilities if you need even more detail? I think training people to use `simp?` is good. :-)

Author: I added the output of `set_option trace.simplify.rewrite true` along with what `simp?` suggests to illustrate the meaning of `simp?`.

```

When the simplifier is attempting to simplify a term `T` it looks
through the `simp` lemmas known to the system at that time, and if it
runs into an applicable lemma of the form `A = B` or `A ↔ B` for which

> `A` shows up in `T`, it rewrites the instance of `A` in `T` with `B`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`A` appears as a subexpression in `T`, it rewrites the instance of `A` in `T` with `B`
```

and then starts again from the beginning. Note that `simp` starts on
innermost terms, working outward: it first simplifies the arguments of

> a function before simplifying the function. Also, `simp` contains a some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a function before simplifying the function. Also, `simp` contains some
```

```

Replacing `1` with `a * a⁻¹` is not a sensible default direction to
travel. Even worse would be a lemma that causes expressions to grow
without bound, causing `simp` to loop forever:

```lean
@[simp] lemma even_worse_lemma: (1 : G) = 1 * 1⁻¹ := ...
```

When making a new definition, it is very common to also introduce
`simp` lemmas to put expressions involving the definition into a
sensible form. An example of this is in mathlib's
[data.complex.basic](https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib/blob/master/src/data/complex/basic.lean),
which has almost 100 `simp` lemmas. Even though they are true by definition, theorems such as
```lean
@[simp] lemma
add_re (z w : ℂ) : (z + w).re = z.re + w.re := rfl
```
are introduced because they give `simp` the ability to reduce expressions and then make use of pre-existing facts.
This one, for example, converts complex addition into real addition.
If you give `simp` permission to use commutativity of real addition, then it is able to
automatically prove `(z + w).re = (w + z).re` through `z.re + w.re =
w.re + z.re`, which is half of the proof that complex addition is commutative.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add here something like:

```suggestion
Anytime you create a new definition in Lean, you should also write some appropriate `simp` lemmas.
This will make it easier for others to use your definition without having to unfold it.

If you are defining something which is a structure, putting the `@[simps]` attribute on the definition
will automatically create `simp` lemmas for the projections.
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. I tried explaining how it's useful having simp lemmas that do partial evaluation, and how `@[simps]` can help.

| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `md` | | `reducible` | Reduction mode: how aggressively constants are replaced with their definitions (`all`, `semireducible`, `instances`, `reducible`, or `none`) |
| `max_steps` | max | max | The maximum number of steps allowed before failing |
| `canonize_instances` | `tt` | `tt` | Replace each instance with a canonical defeq one |
| `canonize_proofs` | `ff` |  |  |
| `single_pass` | `ff` | `ff` | Visit each subterm no more than once |
| `fail_if_unchanged` | `tt` | `tt` | Fail if no simplifications applied |
| `eta` | `tt` | `tt` | Allow eta-equivalence: `(λ x, F x)` ↝ `F` |
| `zeta`| `tt` | `tt` | Do zeta-reductions: `let x : a := b in c` ↝ `c[x/b]` |
| `beta` | `tt` | `tt` | Do beta-reductions: `(λ x, E) y` ↝ `E[x/y]` |
| `proj` | `tt` | `tt` | Reduce projections: `⟨a, b⟩.1` ↝ `a` |
| `iota` | `tt` | `tt` | Reduce recursors: `nat.rec_on (succ n) Z R` ↝ `R n (nat.rec_on n Z R)` |
| `iota_eqn` | `ff` | | Reduce using all equation lemmas generated by the equation compiler |
| `unfold_reducible` | | `ff` | Unfold definitions with `reducible` transparency (delta-reduce) |
| `memoize` | `tt` | `tt` | Perform caching of simps of subterms |

> | `contextual` | `ff` | | |

Reviewer 2: Mario talks about what contextual does [here](https://leanprover.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/113489-new-members/topic/custom.20simp-sets/near/235615807)

Author: Ok, added some information

will likely do the same thing.  Another common use of `dsimp` is
```lean
dsimp only
```
which is short for `dsimp only []`, a `dsimp` with an empty set of `simp` lemmas.
This can be safely used in the middle of a proof, and it can be a useful
way to tidy up a goal: among other things, it does beta reduction for lambda expressions
(it will turn `(λ x, f x) 37` into `f 37`) and it will reduce structure projections
(it will turn `{to_fun := f, ...}.to_fun` into `f`).

## More advanced features

### Full syntax

This is the full syntax for the `dsimp` tactic:

> `dsimp` (`only`)? (`*` | `[` list of lemmas `]`)? (`with` simp sets)? (`at` locations)? (`{` configuration options `}`)?

where "( ... )?" means an optional part of the expression, and "|" gives mutually exclusive options.
The list of lemmas is similar to that of `rw`, but additionally `-lemma_name` means a lemma is excluded from the set of `simp` lemmas.
Configuration options are described in a following section.

This is the full syntax for the `simp` tactic:

> `simp` (`!`)? (`?`)? (`only`)? (`*` | `[` list of arguments `]`)? (`with` simp sets)? (`at` locations)? (`{` configuration options `}`)?

> If `!` is present, it adds `iota := tt` to the configuration options.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If `!` is present, it adds `iota_eqn := tt` to the configuration options.
```

Author: Thanks for catching that

and some of them are not fully documented.  These are reproduced in the
following table, where the default value for a configuration option
for `simp` or `dsimp` is given in the respective column -- if no
default value is present, that option is unavailable.
The "max" default value refers to `simp.default_max_steps`, which is currently `10000000`.

| Option | `simp` | `dsimp` | Description |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `contextual` | `ff` | | Use additional `simp` lemmas based on the context of the current subexpression (see example below)  |
| `single_pass` | `ff` | `ff` | Visit each subterm no more than once |
| `md` | | `reducible` | Reduction mode: how aggressively constants are replaced with their definitions (`all`, `semireducible`, `instances`, `reducible`, or `none`) |
| `max_steps` | max | max | The maximum number of steps allowed before failing |
| `canonize_instances` | `tt` | `tt` | Replace each instance with a canonical defeq one |
| `canonize_proofs` | `ff` |  |  |
| `fail_if_unchanged` | `tt` | `tt` | Fail if no simplifications applied |
| `eta` | `tt` | `tt` | Allow eta-equivalence: `(λ x, F x)` ↝ `F` |

> | `zeta`| `tt` | `tt` | Do zeta-reductions: `let x : a := b in c` ↝ `c[x/b]` |
> | `beta` | `tt` | `tt` | Do beta-reductions: `(λ x, E) y` ↝ `E[x/y]` |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `zeta`| `tt` | `tt` | Do zeta-reductions: `let x : a := b in c` ↝ `c[x := b]` |
| `beta` | `tt` | `tt` | Do beta-reductions: `(λ x, E) y` ↝ `E[x := y]` |
```
Substitution is usually/often written the other way around: `c[b/x]` (see e.g. the link below). The above suggestion is unambiguous notation for substitution (but maybe confusing since we also use it in `let`?
https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/273294/substitution-in-lambda-calculus

(also fix the occurrence below the table)

Author: Thanks, I'm happy to replace that with less ambiguous notation.

For what it's worth, it's lifted from https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean/blob/master/library/init/meta/simp_tactic.lean#L132

```lean
@[simp] lemma
add_re (z w : ℂ) : (z + w).re = z.re + w.re := rfl
```
are introduced because they give `simp` the ability to reduce expressions and then make use of pre-existing facts.
This one, for example, converts complex addition into real addition.
If you give `simp` permission to use commutativity of real addition, then it is able to
automatically prove `(z + w).re = (w + z).re` through `z.re + w.re =
w.re + z.re`, which is half of the proof that complex addition is commutative.

The Lean kernel itself is a rewrite system for lambda calculus, which has a definite
notion of forward progress.  With this in mind, a useful family of
`simp` lemmas are those that, in this sense, let `simp` partially evaluate an
expression. For example, if you have a structure type `foo` and
define a structure `my_foo` with that type,
```lean
structure foo := (n : ℕ)

def my_foo : foo := {n := 37}
```
then if you add a `simp` lemma that `my_foo.n = 37`, you give the simplifier the
ability to evaluate the `foo.n` projection for `my_foo`, which saves you from having
to unfold the definition of `my_foo` (by default `simp` does not unfold most definitions).

> Creating these `simp` lemmas is so common that there is an attribute that creates
> them all for you automatically:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Creating these `simp` lemmas is so common that there is
[an attribute](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib_docs/attributes.html#simps)
that creates them all for you automatically:
```

lemma about a definition you made yourself, think about the normal
forms for ideas that can be expressed in more than one way.

An example of a `simp` normal form is a way of expressing nonemptiness
of a subset of a type.  If `α : Type` and `s : set α` then
nonemptiness of `s` can be expressed as both `s.nonempty` and `s ≠ ∅`.
In mathlib an effort is made to stick to `s.nonempty` as the normal
form.

Another example: every finite set `s : finset α` can be coerced
to `set α`, so for `a : α` one can write both `a ∈ s` and
`a ∈ (s : set α)` to mean the same thing.  The simp normal form for
membership in a finite set idea is `a ∈ s`, and moreover there is a
normalizing `simp` lemma
```lean
@[simp] lemma mem_coe {a : α} {s : finset α} : a ∈ (s : set α) ↔ a ∈ s := ...
```
to replace occurrences of `a ∈ (s : set α)` with the correct normal form.

Because the simplifier works from the inside out, simplifying
arguments of a function before simplifying the function, a `simp`
lemma should have the arguments to the function on its left-hand side in simp-normal
form. For example if `g 0` can be simplified, then `@[simp] lemma foo : f (g 0) = 0` will never be used.

> Mathlib's `simp_nf` linter checks for this

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Mathlib's `simp_nf` [linter](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib_docs/commands.html#linting%20commands) checks for this
```

### Custom simp attributes

Using the command [`mk_simp_attribute`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib_docs/commands.html#mk_simp_attribute),
you can make your own `@[simp]`-like attribute, but with a key difference:
lemmas tagged with `@[new_attr]` are _not_ in the default set of `simp` lemmas.
Instead, they are included using the syntax `simp with new_attr`. This can often replace lengthy 
`simp only [...]` calls and facilitate easier-to-read code. Some examples of common usage are 
[`mfld_simps`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib_docs/find/simp_attr.mfld_simps/src),
and [`field_simps`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib_docs/find/simp_attr.field_simps/src).

### Configuration options

Both `simp` and `dsimp` can take additional configuration options using record syntax.
For example, `simp {single_pass := tt}` runs `simp` with the `single_pass` configuration option set to true.
One can use `single_pass` to avoid loops that might otherwise occur.

The core Lean file `init/meta/simp_tactic.lean` reveals other configuration options in

> the `dsimp_config` and `simp_config` structures.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
the [`dsimp_config`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib_docs/find/tactic.dsimp_config/src) and [`simp_config`](https://leanprover-community.github.io/mathlib_docs/find/tactic.simp_config/src) structures.
```

| `single_pass` | `ff` | `ff` | Visit each subterm no more than once |
| `md` | | `reducible` | Reduction mode: how aggressively constants are replaced with their definitions (`all`, `semireducible`, `instances`, `reducible`, or `none`) |
| `max_steps` | max | max | The maximum number of steps allowed before failing |
| `fail_if_unchanged` | `tt` | `tt` | Fail if no simplifications applied |
| `beta` | `tt` | `tt` | Do beta-reductions: `(λ x, a) y` ↝ `a[x := y]` |
| `eta` | `tt` | `tt` | Allow eta-equivalence: `(λ x, f x)` ↝ `f` |
| `zeta`| `tt` | `tt` | Do zeta-reductions: `let x := a in b` ↝ `b[x := a]` |
| `proj` | `tt` | `tt` | Reduce projections: `prod.fst (a, b)` ↝ `a` |
| `iota` | `tt` | `tt` | Reduce recursors: `nat.rec_on (succ n) Z R` ↝ `R n (nat.rec_on n Z R)` |
| `iota_eqn` | `ff` | | Reduce using all equation lemmas generated by the equation compiler |
| `unfold_reducible` | | `ff` | Unfold definitions with `reducible` transparency (delta-reduce) |
| `memoize` | `tt` | `tt` | Perform caching of simps of subterms |
| `lift_eq` | `tt` | | Prove reflexive relations using proofs of equality (?) |

> | `use_axioms` | `tt` | | Allow simplifications that require `propext` or `funext` (?) |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `use_axioms` | `tt` | | Allow using `propext` and `funext` to rewrite under binders and use `A ↔ B` `simp` lemmas |
```
